[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
john kaye and rachel bird
good morning our headlines today on the
brink of a brexit deal after
months of talks an agreement between the
uk and the eu
is expected this morning with boris
johnson now preparing to address the
nation we're going to bring you all the
developments
and what it all means throughout the
programme stay at home from boxing day
the message to another six
million people in england as more tier
four restrictions are brought in
a plea for calm at the port of dover
lorry drivers stranded in kent are urged
to be patient
as they wait to cross the channel good
morning
manchester united strike late to reach
the league cup semi-finals
two goals in the closing minutes take
them past everton
including an absolute cracker from
cavani
revealing his battle with loneliness on
breakfast more than 7 000 christmas
cards have been sent to world war ii
veteran john lester we'll bring you his
reaction
and there are numerous flood warnings
across england wales this morning after
yesterday's heavy rain good news is
today though it is looking drier
brighter but much much colder have all
your christmas forecast details coming
up here on breakfast
[Music]
good morning christmas eve thursday the
24th of december and our top story is
that after months of
talks a brexit trade deal between the uk
and the eu
is expected to be confirmed in the next
few hours we'll bring that to you
as and when it happens the deal document
is thought to be around 2000 pages long
with both sides having until the 31st of
december when the uk
leaves eu trading rules to get it
approved
it's taken a long time to get here
hasn't it the uk and the eu have locked
horns over a number of issues
over these negotiations but there were
three sticking points that proved
difficult to navigate over the last few
weeks let's just have a look through
them
first there was fishing now the uk said
it voted to take back control of its own
waters and wanted
maximum access for its boat but the eu
still wanted its vessels to be able to
fish here
both sides needed them to agree on rules
that would stop the other side from
having an unfair advantage
in areas like workers rights and whether
they're allowed to provide
subsidies to some industries and thirdly
if a deal is reached and it looks like
they're close who will be
in charge of making sure that those
rules are followed
the eu wanted the european court of
justice to do it
the uk did not well we're joined now by
our political correspondent ian watson
who's in westminster ian
we are on the brink of something really
significant here we were supposed to be
speaking to the foreign secretary
dominic grab
this morning after half seven that was
cancelled late last night so this gives
you some sense of
the speed and the significance of what's
happening
uh absolutely rachel uh it's potentially
a historic day i mean how many brexit
deadlines have been missed
in the talks and indeed the brexit
process itself the deadline was moved
twice but it looks as though finally we
are going to get a brexit deal
there's going to be a call we are told
uh probably the next hour or so between
boris johnson and the eu commissioned
president as they've earned a line that
will effectively
sign off at the future relationship deal
that includes trade and a whole range of
other issues as well including security
and data sharing so that is hugely
significant because we are just
precisely one week away from leaving
the eu rules behind permanently and
there's been a
huge tussle as you know about what would
follow on next i think the reason we're
still talking about a potential deal
this morning rather than actual deal is
that they've have to translate a range
of compromises into
legal text and the british delegations
were going through that to the fine
tooth comb overnight i'm told there's
still a tussle over
how much of each type of species of fish
could be caught in british waters
after the end of this year but it looks
as though
the compromises have been done the deal
has been done and we will get
confirmation of that this morning i
think the reason you don't have dominic
rabbis we're likely to hear from the
prime minister
himself at some point this morning
declaring a deal has been done but that
deal will then come under a great deal
of scrutiny
not least from mps in his own party who
are very skeptical about whether he's
delivered
his promise on uk sovereignty and then
of course it has to go through
two more hurdles the british parliament
has to ratify it
next week and subsequently uh into the
new year the european parliament will
then be taking a look at this as well
the deal will be provisional until
they've also given it the thumbs up
thank you very much it might be the last
we see of ian this morning yeah he's
going to earn his money this christmas
eve isn't he
there was he thinking it was going to be
a nice quiet show before the big day
we are right across this we've got teams
in westminster
and in brussels and we'll give you all
the details as this story develops
throughout the morning
i think sometimes it's been hard hasn't
it to work out what all those talks mean
to our lives to real life here but
that's what we're going to try to
explain this morning
and we're going to speak to our brussels
correspondent in the next few minutes
but there is other big story around this
morning
yeah huge because let's not forget the
thousands of drivers facing another
night in their lorries at the port of
dover as they wait across the channel
yeah those drivers will only be able to
get onto ferries after they've had a
negative
covert test back let's speak to our
reporter simon jones who's in manston
near dover where those thousands of
lorries have been parked up
uh simon what are you seeing is the
disruption continuing
absolutely we're just across the road
from the manster lorry park and
everywhere you look on the side roads
you've got lorries parked up
driving in today along the lay bys
lorries
everywhere you can see as far as the eye
can see
now yesterday the transport secretary
grant said clearing this
is going to be a mammoth task and he
wasn't lying because
although we had the start yesterday of
this
testing that allows drivers to leave the
uk
if they get a negative test the number
of lorries caught up in all this has
actually
increased as hawley's have continued to
head towards kent so
at the moment here in manson at the
official lorry parking we have
at the moment around 4 000 lorries
parked up
also on the m20 there are another 2
000 so it gives you a sense of the scale
of this
issue now another fly in the ointment is
that as it stands the port of dover
shuts on christmas day so there won't be
any services so that could further delay
people
trying to get home and it means in
reality a lot of drivers like this are
unlikely to get home in time for
christmas there are discussions taking
place behind the scenes to see whether
extra ferry services could be brought in
to try to help with the backlog
and euro tunnel will remain open on
christmas day
i think the hope today is that the
testing can be ramped up it was a pretty
slow start
it involved getting logistics in place
but now the military have been brought
in
military personnel sent into kent to try
to get to grips with this
but this morning we understand that
dover remains gridlocked so highways
england have taken the extraordinary
step of saying
not just the hauliers but to any drivers
do not come to kent because it's pretty
much chaos here
okay simon thank you for the update
we'll speak to you later as well thanks
another six million people will be
facing tougher restrictions from boxing
day as a large chunk of the south and
east of england moves to tier 4
restrictions
the health secretary matt hancock said
it was because the current tier 3 wasn't
enough to contain that faster spreading
variant
of the virus aruna ayanga has this
report
remember this boxing day 2019
and shoppers flock to the sales
it's a very different picture this year
24 million people will be living under
the toughest here for coronavirus
restrictions
these shoppers in huntington
cambridgeshire are taking the new
measures
in their stride if it's going to keep us
safe in the end
that's really good and i'm quite happy i
think it's a good thing
if we have gone into a high tier
personally i think we should all go down
to another lockdown
it worked last time matt hancock said
the old tiering system was not enough to
control the new variant of the virus
he revealed another variant from south
africa has been detected
in the uk this new variant is highly
concerning
because it is yet more transmissible and
it appears to have mutated further
than the new variant that's been
discovered in the uk
all flights arriving in the uk from
south africa are banned from this
morning
also anyone who has been in south africa
or who has been in close contact with
someone who's been there in the past
fortnight
is asked to quarantine immediately
across the uk people will be celebrating
christmas in limited ways
in scotland christmas bubbles will be
allowed on christmas day
with a maximum of eight people from
three households
in northern ireland a six-week lockdown
starts on boxing day
the first week will have stricter
restrictions though people can form a
christmas bubble
for one day between the 23rd and 27th of
december
and wales is in a new national lockdown
after a large spike in cases
the health secretary had this christmas
message
we mustn't give up now we know
that we can control this virus we know
we can get through this together
we're going to get through it by
suppressing the virus until a vaccine
can make us safe
all hopes now rest with the vaccine
rollout aruna ayenga bbc news
well one of those areas affected is
oxford which will be moving from tier
two
into tier four and breakfast tim moffat
is air before us this morning with the
latest what's the move there now tim
yeah once you make big changes as you
say for six million people from boxing
day
oxfordshire currently tier two going
into tier four and many other places
moving into that higher tier as well
cambridgeshire norfolk suffolk
most of hampshire west sussex the parts
of east sussex
and essex not already in tier four as
well as waverly
joining the rest of surrey in tier four
as well now matt hancock saying that the
three-tier system just isn't enough to
deal with the
new strains which have currently been
identified now in oxfordshire cases have
risen
by 86 um in
the week leading up to december the 18th
so real
concern here and an acknowledgement that
something does need to be done
now obviously we're in the high street
this morning this
probably will be relatively busy today
as some people go to the shops which are
allowed to open under tier 2
restrictions however from midnight
christmas day into boxing day that will
change much tougher restrictions under
tier 4
people advise to stay at home unless
they are carrying out something
essential thanks very much tim
in the united states president trump has
issued another round of controversial
pardons
as his term in office draws to a close
his former campaign manager paul
manafort and his longtime advisor
roger stone are among the latest 26
people
to benefit from those pardons paul
manafort was convicted in 2018 in an
investigation into alleged russian
meddling in the 2016 u.s
election roger stone was convicted of
lying to congress
heavy rain has flooded homes and
disrupted travel in parts of wales
trains between cardiff and newport have
been cancelled while roads
in both cities have been closed there
are now nine flood warnings in place
between pembrokeshire and monmouthshire
the duke and duchess of sussex have
shared their family christmas cards
we can church you there it is they're in
california of course now the
illustration shows uh megan and harry
their son archie and their two dogs guy
and
poola the image was tweeted it's
come from i think it's an animal charity
that the duchess supports who's kind of
sponsored their card this morning
i think they're just flexing about the
fact that it's a reasonably nice weather
there
yeah nice yeah wouldn't we if we could
the gray
muddy windsor wouldn't be quite the same
we'll just check out where matt is this
morning that's not going to be on his
christmas card next year is it
i hope not no definitely i just
mentioned flooding in wales just then
rachel this is the scene in
northamptonshire yesterday and it's
across
other parts of england we do have over
90 flood warnings in force
across parts of the midlands east anglia
and the southwest all the latest flood
warning details are on the weather
website
we'll of course keep you updated on that
but the good news is the rain is now
easing away
different sort of day to come today
there's the last dregs of that rain from
yesterday
what we have now are clutches of showers
and the white here an indication of snow
showers across scotland the covering in
places this morning
icy conditions as well rain showers will
affect the far west of wales west
cornwall throughout and we'll see
showers mainly of rain but even some
sleet and snow mixed in
to eastern counties of england through
today but that'll be about it for most
of you
it will be a dry and bright day but with
strong winds
winds easing down from those we saw
through the night but coming in from the
north
could touch gale force down those
eastern coasts and that is going to have
a big impact
on the way things feel out there already
on the thermometers temperatures will be
below average for the time of year but
add on the effect of the wind is going
to feel sub-zero for most
as we go through this afternoon so a
chilly end to
a christmas eve a cold night to come
tonight still some further showers
down eastern counties of england the odd
flake of snow mixed in clouds increasing
to parts of scotland
and northern ireland to lifting
temperatures here but for most a sparkle
of frost to start your christmas morning
widespread and cold start
much of in the whales will have lots of
sunshine a few showers still close to
eastern coast
clouding over in scotland and northern
ireland but it will be a chilly
christmas day
rachel and john back to you okay matt
thank you very much indeed we'll see you
again a little bit later
should we take a look at the papers and
all of them with an element of kind of
excitement or drama
about this brexit deal potentially being
done uh that's leading many of the
papers this morning
it's almost over says the daily mirror
this morning that's their front page
uh the mail's front page hallelujah they
say
it's merry brexmas thumbs up from boris
jones i think it's an old
picture but we get the message and then
according to the times the agreement was
delayed because lawyers and negotiators
attempted to translate the final
compromises
particularly on fishing into a binding
legal text reminder we still don't know
the detail of
this deal if there is indeed a deal
which we'll think will be announced a
little bit later on this morning and
when will we get that detail as well
isn't it we might hear there's a deal
but when will we all see the detail
guardian says both sides battled
deep into the night to gain a last
minute advantage in that potential deal
but they said it's now within touching
distance according to number 10.
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with
bbc news